Source: https://arxiv.org/html/2111.06377v3#S3
Extracted Section 3 only. Figure elements/captions removed.

3 Approach
Our masked autoencoder (MAE) is a simple autoencoding approach that reconstructs the original signal given its partial observation. Like all autoencoders, our approach has an encoder that maps the observed signal to a latent representation, and a decoder that reconstructs the original signal from the latent representation. Unlike classical autoencoders, we adopt an asymmetric design that allows the encoder to operate only on the partial, observed signal (without mask tokens) and a lightweight decoder that reconstructs the full signal from the latent representation and mask tokens. Figure 1 illustrates the idea, introduced next.
Masking.
Following ViT [16], we divide an image into regular non-overlapping patches. Then we sample a subset of patches and mask (i.e., remove) the remaining ones. Our sampling strategy is straightforward: we sample random patches without replacement, following a uniform distribution. We simply refer to this as “random sampling”.
Random sampling with a high masking ratio (i.e., the ratio of removed patches) largely eliminates redundancy, thus creating a task that cannot be easily solved by extrapolation from visible neighboring patches (see Figures 2 – 4). The uniform distribution prevents a potential center bias (i.e., more masked patches near the image center). Finally, the highly sparse input creates an opportunity for designing an efficient encoder, introduced next.
MAE encoder.
Our encoder is a ViT [16] but applied only on visible, unmasked patches. Just as in a standard ViT, our encoder embeds patches by a linear projection with added positional embeddings, and then processes the resulting set via a series of Transformer blocks. However, our encoder only operates on a small subset (e.g., 25%) of the full set. Masked patches are removed; no mask tokens are used. This allows us to train very large encoders with only a fraction of compute and memory. The full set is handled by a lightweight decoder, described next.
MAE decoder.
The input to the MAE decoder is the full set of tokens consisting of (i) encoded visible patches, and (ii) mask tokens. See Figure 1. Each mask token [14] is a shared, learned vector that indicates the presence of a missing patch to be predicted. We add positional embeddings to all tokens in this full set; without this, mask tokens would have no information about their location in the image. The decoder has another series of Transformer blocks.
The MAE decoder is only used during pre-training to perform the image reconstruction task (only the encoder is used to produce image representations for recognition). Therefore, the decoder architecture can be flexibly designed in a manner that is independent of the encoder design. We experiment with very small decoders, narrower and shallower than the encoder. For example, our default decoder has <<10% computation per token vs. the encoder. With this asymmetrical design, the full set of tokens are only processed by the lightweight decoder, which significantly reduces pre-training time.
Reconstruction target.
Our MAE reconstructs the input by predicting the pixel values for each masked patch. Each element in the decoder’s output is a vector of pixel values representing a patch. The last layer of the decoder is a linear projection whose number of output channels equals the number of pixel values in a patch. The decoder’s output is reshaped to form a reconstructed image. Our loss function computes the mean squared error (MSE) between the reconstructed and original images in the pixel space. We compute the loss only on masked patches, similar to BERT [14].11
1
Computing the loss only on masked patches differs from traditional denoising autoencoders [58] that compute the loss on all pixels. This choice is purely result-driven: computing the loss on all pixels leads to a slight decrease in accuracy (e.g., ∼\scriptstyle\sim0.5%).
We also study a variant whose reconstruction target is the normalized pixel values of each masked patch. Specifically, we compute the mean and standard deviation of all pixels in a patch and use them to normalize this patch. Using normalized pixels as the reconstruction target improves representation quality in our experiments.
Simple implementation.
Our MAE pre-training can be implemented efficiently, and importantly, does not require any specialized sparse operations. First we generate a token for every input patch (by linear projection with an added positional embedding). Next we randomly shuffle the list of tokens and remove the last portion of the list, based on the masking ratio. This process produces a small subset of tokens for the encoder and is equivalent to sampling patches without replacement. After encoding, we append a list of mask tokens to the list of encoded patches, and unshuffle this full list (inverting the random shuffle operation) to align all tokens with their targets. The decoder is applied to this full list (with positional embeddings added). As noted, no sparse operations are needed. This simple implementation introduces negligible overhead as the shuffling and unshuffling operations are fast.